Now sleep y-slaked haththe rout;
No din but snores thehouse about,
Made louder by theo'er-fed breast
Of this most pompousmarriage-feast.
The cat, with eyne ofburning coal,
Now crouches fore themouse's hole;
And crickets sing at theoven's mouth,
E'er the blither for theirdrouth.
Hymen hath brought thebride to bed.
Where, by the loss ofmaidenhead,
A babe is moulded. Beattent,
And time that is sobriefly spent
With your fine fanciesquaintly eche:
What's dumb in show I'llplain with speech.
By many a dern and painfulperch
Of Pericles the carefulsearch,
By the four opposingcoigns
Which the world togetherjoins,
Is made with all duediligence
That horse and sail andhigh expense
Can stead the quest. Atlast from Tyre,
Fame answering the moststrange inquire,
To the court of KingSimonides
Are letters brought, thetenor these:
Antiochus and his daughterdead;
The men of Tyrus on thehead
Of Helicanus would set on
The crown of Tyre, but hewill none:
The mutiny he there hastest' oppress;
Says to 'em, if KingPericles
Come not home in twice sixmoons,
He, obedient to theirdooms,
Will take the crown. Thesum of this,
Brought hither toPentapolis,
Y-ravished the regionsround,
And every one with clapscan sound,
'Our heir-apparent is aking!
Who dream'd, who thoughtof such a thing?'
Brief, he must hencedepart to Tyre:
His queen with child makesher desire--
Which who shallcross?--along to go:
Omit we all their dole andwoe:
Lychorida, her nurse, shetakes,
And so to sea.
Their vessel shakes on Neptune'sbillow; half the flood
Hath their keel cut: butfortune's mood
Varies again; the grislynorth
Disgorges such a tempestforth,
That, as a duck for lifethat dives,
So up and down the poorship drives:
The lady shrieks, andwell-a-near
Does fall in travail withher fear:
And what ensues in thisfell storm
Shall for itself itselfperform.
I nill relate, action may
Conveniently the restconvey;
Which might not what by meis told.
In your imagination hold
This stage the ship, uponwhose deck
The sea-tost Periclesappears to speak.
Thou god of this greatvast, rebuke these surges,
Which wash both heaven andhell; and thou, that hast
Upon the winds command,bind them in brass,
Having call'd themfrom the deep!
O, still thy deafening,dreadful thunders;
gently quench thy nimble,sulphurous flashes!
O, how, Lychorida,How does my queen?
Thou stormest venomously;
Wilt thou spit all thyself?The seaman's whistle
Is as a whisper in theears of death,
Unheard. Lychorida!--Lucina,
O Divinest patroness,and midwife gentle
To those that cry bynight, convey thy deity
Aboard our dancing boat;make swift the pangs
Of my queen's travails!
Here is a thing too youngfor such a place,
Who, if it hadconceit, would die,
as I am like to do: takein your arms this piece
Of your dead queen.
How, how, Lychorida!
Patience, good sir; do notassist the storm.
Here's all that is leftliving of your queen,
A little daughter: for thesake of it,
Be manly, and takecomfort.
O you gods!
Why do you make us loveyour goodly gifts,
And snatch them straightaway? We here below
Recall not what we give,and therein may
Use honour with you.
Patience, good sir,
Even for this charge.
Now, mild may be thy life!
For a more blustrous birthhad never babe:
Quiet and gentlethy conditions!
for thou art the rudeliestwelcome to this world
That ever was prince'schild. Happy what follows!
Thou hast as chiding anativity
As fire, air, water, earth,and heaven can make,
To herald thee from the womb:poor itch of nature
even at the first thy loss ismore than can thy portage quit,
With all thou canst findhere. Now, the good gods
Throw their best eyesupon't!
What courage, sir? Godsave you!
Courage enough: I do notfear the flaw;
It hath done to me theworst. Yet, for the love
Of this poor infant, thisfresh-new sea-farer,
I would it would be quiet.
Slack the bolins there!Thou wilt not, wilt thou?
Blow, and split thyself.
But sea-room, an the brine andcloudy billow kiss the moon,
I care not.
Sir, your queen mustoverboard: the sea works high,
the wind is loud, and willnot lie till the ship be
cleared of the dead.
That's your superstition.
Pardon us, sir; with us at seait hath been still observed:
and we are strong in custom.
Therefore briefly yield her; forshe must overboard straight.
As you think meet. Mostwretched queen!
Here she lies, sir.
A terrible childbed hastthou had, my dear;
No light, no fire: theunfriendly elements
Forgot thee utterly: norhave I time
To give thee hallow'd tothy grave, but straight
Must cast thee, scarcelycoffin'd, in the ooze;
Where, for a monument uponthy bones,
And e'er-remaining lamps,the belching whale
And humming water musto'erwhelm thy corpse,
Lying with simple shells.
O Lychorida,
Bid Nestor bring mespices, ink and paper,
My casket and my jewels;and bid Nicander
Bring me the satin coffer: laythe babe upon the pillow:
hie thee, whiles I say
A priestly farewell toher: suddenly, woman.
Sir, we have a chestbeneath the hatches,
caulked and bitumed ready.
I thank thee. Mariner, saywhat coast is this?
We are near Tarsus.
Thither, gentle mariner.
Alter thy course for Tyre.When canst thou reach it?
By break of day, if thewind cease.
O, make for Tarsus!
There will I visit Cleon,for the babe
Cannot hold out to Tyrus:
there I'll leave itat careful nursing.
Go thy ways, good mariner:
I'll bring the bodypresently.
Philemon, ho!
Doth my lord call?
Get fire and meat forthese poor men:
'T has been a turbulentand stormy night.
I have been in many; butsuch a night as this,
Till now, I ne'er endured.
Your master will be deadere you return;
There's nothing can beminister'd to nature
That can recover him.
Give this to the'pothecary,
And tell me how it works.
Good morrow.
Good morrow to yourlordship.
Gentlemen,
Why do you stir so early?
Sir,
Our lodgings, standingbleak upon the sea,
Shook as the earth didquake;
The very principals didseem to rend,
And all-to topple: puresurprise and fear
Made me to quit the house.
That is the cause wetrouble you so early;
'Tis not our husbandry.
O, you say well.
But I much marvel thatyour lordship, having
Rich tire about you, shouldat these early hours
Shake off the goldenslumber of repose.
'Tis most strange,
Nature should be soconversant with pain,
Being thereto notcompell'd.
I hold it ever,
Virtue and cunning wereendowments greater
Than nobleness and riches:careless heirs
May the two latter darkenand expend;
But immortality attendsthe former.
Making a man a god. 'Tis known,
I ever have studied physic,through which secret art,
By turning o'erauthorities, I have,
Together with my practise,made familiar
To me and to my aid theblest infusions
That dwell in vegetives,in metals, stones;
And I can speak of thedisturbances
That nature works, and of hercures; which doth give me
A more content in courseof true delight
Than to be thirsty aftertottering honour,
Or tie my treasure up insilken bags,
To please the fool anddeath.
Your honour has throughEphesus pour'd forth
Your charity, and hundredscall themselves
Your creatures, who by youhave been restored:
And not your knowledge,your personal pain,
but even your purse, stillopen, hath built Lord Cerimon
Such strong renown astime shall ne'er raise.
So; lift there.
What is that?
Sir, even now did the sea tossupon our shore this chest:
'Tis of some wreck.
Set 't down, let's lookupon't.
'Tis like a coffin, sir.
Whate'er it be, 'Tiswondrous heavy.
Wrench it open straight:
If the sea's stomach beo'ercharged with gold,
'Tis a good constraint offortune it belches upon us.
'Tis so, my lord.
How close 'tis caulk'd andbitumed!
Did the sea cast it up?
I never saw so huge abillow, sir,
As toss'd it upon shore.
Wrench it open;
Soft! it smells mostsweetly in my sense.
A delicate odour.
As ever hit my nostril.So, up with it.
O you most potent gods!what's here? a corse!
Most strange!
Shrouded in cloth of state;balm'd and entreasured
With full bags of spices!A passport too!
Apollo, perfect me in thecharacters!
'Here I give tounderstand,
If e'er this coffin drivea-land,
I, King Pericles, havelost this queen,
worth all our mundane cost.
Who finds her, give herburying;
She was the daughter of aking:
Besides this treasure fora fee,
The gods requite hischarity!'
O Pericles, If thou livest,thou hast a heart
That even cracks for woe!This chanced tonight.
Most likely, sir.
Nay, certainly to-night;
For look how fresh shelooks! They were too rough
That threw her in the sea.Make a fire within:
Fetch hither all my boxesin my closet.
Death may usurp on naturemany hours,
And yet the fire of lifekindle again
The o'erpress'd spirits. Iread of some Egyptians
Who after four hourse death,have raised impoverished spirits
Like to this, unto their formerheatlh.
Well said, well said; thefire and cloths.
The rough and woeful musicthat we have,
Cause it to sound, beseechyou.
The viol once more:
how thou stirr'st, thou block!
The music there!--I prayyou, give her air.
Gentlemen.
This queen will live:nature awakes; a warmth
Breathes out of her: shehath not been entranced
Above five hours: see howshe gins to blow
Into life's flower again!
The heavens, Through you,increase our wonder
and set up your fame forever.
She is alive; behold,
Her eyelids, cases tothose heavenly jewels
Which Pericles hath lost,
Begin to part theirfringes of bright gold;
The diamonds of a mostpraised water
Doth appear, to makethe world twice rich.
Live, and make us weep to hearyour fate, fair creature,
Rare as you seem to be.
O dear Diana,
Where am I? Where's mylord? What world is this?
Is not this strange?
Most rare.
Hush, my gentleneighbours!
Lend me your hands; to thenext chamber bear her.
Get linen: now this mattermust be look'd to,
For her relapse is mortal.Come, come;
And AEsculapius guide us!
Most honour'd Cleon, Imust needs be gone;
My twelve months areexpired, and Tyrus stands
In a litigious peace. You,and your lady,
Take from my heartall thankfulness!
The gods make upthe rest upon you!
Your strokes of fortune, thoughthey hurt you mortally,
Yet glance fullwoundingly on us.
O your sweet queen! That thestrict fates had pleased you
had brought her hither,
To have bless'd mine eyeswith her!
We cannot but obeythe powers above us.
Could I rage and roar as doth the sea she lies in,
yet the end must be as 'tis.
My gentle babe Marina, whom,
For she was born atsea, I have named so,
here I charge yourcharity withal,
leaving her the infant ofyour care; beseeching you
To give her princelytraining, that she may be
Manner'd as she is born.
Fear not, my lord, butthink
Your grace, that fed mycountry with your corn,
For which the people'sprayers still fall upon you,
Must in your childbe thought on.
If neglection should thereinmake me vile, the common body,
By you relieved, wouldforce me to my duty:
But if to that my natureneed a spur,
The gods revenge it uponme and mine,
To the end of generation!
I believe you;
Your honour and yourgoodness teach me to't,
Without your vows. Tillshe be married, madam,
By bright Diana,whom we honour,
all unscissor'd shall thishair of mine remain,
Though I show ill in't. SoI take my leave.
Good madam, make meblessed in your care
In bringing up my child.
I have one myself,
Who shall not be more dearto my respect
Than yours, my lord.
Madam, my thanks andprayers.
We'll bring your grace e'ento the edge o' the shore,
Then give you up tothe mask'd Neptune
and the gentlestwinds of heaven.
I will embrace your offer.
Come, dearest madam. O, notears, Lychorida, no tears:
Look to your littlemistress, on whose grace
You may depend hereafter.Come, my lord.
Madam, this letter, andsome certain jewels,
Lay with you in your coffer:
which are now at your command.
Know you the character?It is my lord's.
That I was shipp'd at sea,I well remember,
Even on my eaning time; butwhether there deliver'd,
by the holy gods, Icannot rightly say.
But since King Pericles,
My wedded lord, I ne'ershall see again,
A vestal livery will Itake me to,
And never more have joy.
Madam, if this you purposeas ye speak,
Diana's temple is notdistant far,
Where you may abide tillyour date expire.
Moreover, if you please, aniece of mine
Shall there attend you.
My recompense is thanks,that's all;
Yet my good will is great,though the gift small.